Robotics

The FIRST Robotics Competition and my team, the 2702 Rebels has become an incredibly important part of my life, despite me only completing one of a possible four years of it. If you've never heard of it, FRC is a robotics competition where a new game is revealed every year for teams to design a robot for, and then after about 2-3 months of build season, teams bring their robots into local competitions in order to qualify for other tournaments like provincials, states or nationals, depending on the country you live in. Being a part of my local team has been such a great experience for me, and I do think it's helped me build my self-confidence.

A very important lesson I learned throughout my first season of FRC is to not underestimate yourself. The robots that teams build are incredibly complex, giant machines, and it seems like it would be impossible to make something of that scale. That's the mindset I went into the season with, despite seeing the robot our team built last year. It's like starting to play a new sport, and you see all the people that have practiced it for years and are amazing at it; it's daunting. However, at the end of the build time, and even more at the end of our second competition, we had a robot we were proud of, and we ended up performing even better than our team ever has. 

However, the biggest part that taught me this lesson was that I would say I had an actual noticeable impact on the robot. For example, this year, the theme was underwater, so there were two "game pieces" a big PVC pipe, called coral, and a huge yoga ball, which was supposed to be algae. You won if you placed or threw the most coral and algae into their respective scoring places. I chose to focus on algae collection and scoring, and I was the only student who was working on that. So it was so cool to feel like I made a real impact on the robot when the arm that I designed in CAD and assembled myself worked in competition.

The term "Gracious Professionalism" is a term that you hear a lot if ou are around the FIRST community. It's a term coined by the late co-founder of the non-profit, Woodie Flowers, and it's a large part of the teaching of the organization. It means a lot of different things. It's caring, it's respect, it's sharing, it's serving, it's giving, it's integrity, it's positivity, it's empathy, and it's peace. But collectively, it represents the competition as a whole. While it is competitive, you need to stay humble in victory, supportive in defeat and the biggest thing is that your competitors are your friends too. It was so cool to see all the teams helping each other when something went wrong with a robot, giving advice to new teams, and donating expensive equipment to others when theirs break, just to keep an even playing field. And that type of support and responsibility can be brought into so many other parts of your life. Whether you're in school, or at another competition, it's so important to remember that the people around you worked hard to get where they are, and they deserve to have someone to help them too. A great example of how our team has helped competitors is with WWFIRST. WWFIRST is a group of 7 teams from the Waterloo-Wellington area, including the Rebels, that work together in many ways. A big way we work together is through our practice field. Many students and mentors from the group make a wooden version of the field each year, and once robots are built, teams bring their robots in and practice on the replica. When there, the teams share all their resources, play practice games with each other, and it is so incredibly important for their success                                                                       

I think that brings us nicely into my final point, that success is relative. When you're at a local competition, you see such a large range of abilities in teams' robots. Since there's really no requirements to what a robot needs to do, teams can choose to focus on one aspect of the game, try to make a robot to do everything, or maybe they just make a robot that can drive around and play defence. All robots have an important part to play, regardless of how many points they can score. There's a reason why the best strategy for alliance building is to choose two robots that can do specific objectives really well, and one robot to play defence on the opposing alliance's side. A new team won't have the experience with FRC to be able to build a robot as good as my team's robot, and certainly not one in the realm of 2056 or 1690, but that doesn't matter. It's not that a team didn't work as hard as those greats of the competition, but everyone starts at different points, and each year, that team will just get better and better.

So, I hope you understand why I love this competition  and my team, because it is without a doubt the best, most enjoyable, and most significant program I have ever been a part of. The teachings of the late Woodie Flowers, and the community that has grown around it, both students and mentors, is truly a sight to behold.